Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today we are
going to be talking about Hannibal.
He was the Carthaginian general who
marched on Rome, is remembered as
one of the greatest tacticians in
military history, and almost destroyed
Rome two hundred years before it
could declare itself an Empire.
OK then, let’s get started, and talk
about Hannibal: Rome’s Greatest Enemy.
There are lots of promises you
might have made as a child.
A promise to your parents that you’d
always tidy your room, or that if you
got a dog, you would always take it
out for a walk, even if it was raining.
Maybe it was a promise to a best friend
that you’d be best friends forever, or a
promise to a first girlfriend or boyfriend
that nothing would ever come between you.
Now, most children–and I’d have to
include myself in this category–are
not so good at keeping promises.
Life happens, we change, and after all, it
wasn’t that important in the first place.
But for one young boy, a promise
made before his tenth birthday
would be something he would spend
his entire life consumed by.
According to one legend, this
nine-year-old swore to forever be an enemy
of Rome, or to put it more precisely,
he was forced to say, “I swear so soon
as age will permit...I will use fire and
steel to arrest the destiny of Rome.”
The boy’s name was Hannibal.
Now, to understand why a father might
make his child swear eternal hatred
towards another state, we need to look
at the world Hannibal was born into.
He was born in 247 BCE in
Carthage, in modern-day Tunisia.
At this time, Carthage was the
heart of a strong maritime power.
Its navy dominated the western
Mediterranean, its harbours were
filled with goods from across North
Africa, southern Spain, Sicily,
even as far as the British Isles.
Its strength came
primarily from sea trade.
Rome, on the other hand,
was mainly land-based.
At this point, in the late third
century BCE, it wasn’t yet the mighty
empire you’re probably picturing.
It was a regional republic with control
over much of the Italian peninsula.
But many of the towns and cities it had
“brought into the fold” were resentful.
Some had been defeated in battle
and forced into uneasy alliances.
Others had been diplomatically
absorbed, sucked up by this
increasingly dominant power.
The term “Rome” at this point meant a
powerful, rising state, but not an empire.
Not yet, at least.
This all changed with a war that came
to be called the First Punic War.
It began in 264 BCE as a struggle
for control over Sicily, the
large, wealthy island that sat
between Italy and North Africa.
It was under the control of Carthage,
but Rome wanted it for itself.
What followed was a
brutal, 23-year conflict.
Rome had no navy to speak of when it
began, but it built one from scratch.
Carthage, the great naval power, was
pushed back, humiliated, and eventually
forced to sign a peace treaty that saw
it lose Sicily and pay heavy reparations.
It was embarrassing and expensive.
And it wasn’t only the loss of
territory that was problematic.
Carthage tended to rely on
mercenaries–paid-for soldiers–and
at the end of the war, there
were tens of thousands of these
mercenaries who hadn’t been paid and
were saying, “Where’s our money?”.
Carthage didn’t have the means
to pay, the mercenaries rose up,
and there was a violent rebellion
that almost destroyed the city.
During all of this chaos, Rome snuck
in and also took the Mediterranean
islands of Sardinia and Corsica.
Now, that is a very brief summary,
but it’s in the aftermath of these
twin humiliations, defeat abroad
and chaos at home, that we find
Hamilcar Barca, Hannibal’s father.
He was a talented general and a proud
Carthaginian, and, perhaps reasonably,
he blamed Rome for all of this.
In his eyes, it was Rome that had
dragged Carthage into a ruinous war.
It was Rome that had crippled
Carthaginian power and taken
advantage of its internal disarray.
So, when Hamilcar set off to rebuild
Carthaginian influence in Spain, where
the silver mines were rich and the
terrain made it an ideal place to train
troops and launch future campaigns,
he took his son Hannibal with him.
And before they left, so the legend
goes, he made Hannibal swear that
he would never be Rome’s friend.
Hannibal was a man–or boy at that
time–who clearly kept his promises.
And it would be in the Iberian
Peninsula–in modern day Spain–that he
would learn the skills that turned him
into such a formidable military commander.
Like Alexander the Great, who
grew up under the watchful eye
of his father, Philip of Macedon,
Hannibal spent his youth in military
camps, on campaign, learning not
from books but from battlefields.
He saw sieges, skirmishes, the
management of supplies and morale.
By his late teens, he was
already commanding men.
He had no formal schooling;
his education was war.
After the death of his father and
then his brother-in-law, Hannibal took
command of Carthage’s forces in Iberia.
He was only 26 years old, but he
would prove to be more than capable.
He was charismatic, brave,
and cool under pressure.
His men loved him.
His enemies feared him.
And he was a master tactician, as we will
come to talk more about in a few minutes.
But even with all of that, the idea of
going to war with Rome was still a bold
move, some might even say reckless.
So why did he do it?
Most historians believe the plan was not
necessarily to destroy Rome completely, or
to conquer the city, but rather to regain
the territory that Carthage had lost
after the first Punic War: specifically,
Sicily, Sardinia and Corsica.
The surest way to do this,
Hannibal thought, was to take
the fight to the Romans, in Rome.
After a couple of years fighting in
Iberia, and then the successful siege
of a city that was allied with Rome,
a city called Saguntum that’s just
north of Valencia, the stage was set.
In the spring of 218 BCE,
Rome declared war on Carthage.
The only question was, where
would the fighting take place?
The Carthaginians were in
modern-day Spain; the Roman
army was in modern-day Italy.
Two Roman legions were sent across the
Mediterranean to face Hannibal, but when
they arrived, they found that Hannibal had
done something they hadn’t bargained for.
Instead of taking the quickest route, by
ship, he had marched his men northwards,
up through Spain and southern France.
This Carthaginian force, which included
tens of thousands of soldiers, cavalry
and war elephants, would march across
the Pyrenees mountains, through
Gaul [in modern-day France], and
over the Alps into northern Italy.
And this wasn’t just a ragtag
group of Carthaginians.
His army was a multi-ethnic
coalition: Libyans, Numidians,
Iberians, Gauls, and Carthaginians.
Each group brought different strengths.
The Numidians, from what is now Algeria,
were exceptional light cavalry — fast,
agile, and used to hit-and-run tactics
that confused heavier Roman formations.
They didn’t wear armour, rode
bareback, and were masters at
harassment and retreat, so perfect
for skirmishing and flanking.
The Libyans were often
used as heavy infantry.
Though they were originally supporting
troops, many of them had been trained
and equipped in the Roman style, with
long spears, oval shields, and discipline
drilled into them by years of warfare.
They gave Hannibal a solid, reliable core.
The Iberians, from what is now Spain,
were fierce and mobile, and were
especially suited to mountainous terrain.
Their weapon of choice was a curved
sword with devastating cutting power.
They weren’t as heavily armoured
as the Roman troops, but
they were bold and adaptable.
Then there were the Gauls, the
recently conquered or allied
tribes from southern France.
They were unpredictable, loud, often
drunk and at times undisciplined, but they
could bring raw power and overwhelming
force when unleashed in a charge.
The army was a microcosm of Carthage
itself: diverse, pragmatic, and
driven by a combination of loyalty to
Hannibal and a shared loathing of Rome.
And, of course, there
were the war elephants.
Not particularly numerous, but terrifying.
Roman horses had never seen
creatures like these, and
neither had most Roman soldiers.
The elephants were difficult to
control and not always particularly
reliable, but their presence caused
fear and chaos on the battlefield.
And it was this army that marched
through Southern France and crossed
the Alps in the summer of 218 BCE.
It’s still not clear exactly which
route Hannibal took, but there was and
still is no easy route across the Alps.
Managing it was a feat so bold that Roman
historians centuries later still couldn’t
quite believe it had actually happened.
The terrain was treacherous,
and the weather brutal.
They lost thousands of men.
The elephants struggled in the snow.
Hannibal himself is said to have
gone blind in one eye from an
infection during the crossing.
But against all odds, they made it.
And what Hannibal found when he descended
into northern Italy was… opportunity.
Many of the tribes and cities
that had been brought under Roman
control were not especially loyal.
They resented Roman taxes, Roman
military conscription, and Roman
interference in local affairs.
They would do almost anything to be
rid of their oppressor, and Hannibal
was ready to take full advantage.
He had no illusions about being
able to conquer Rome by himself.
His strategy relied on breaking
Rome’s alliances, encouraging these
Italian communities to join him
and rise up against the Republic.
If he could do that, if he
could isolate Rome, then maybe,
just maybe, it would fall.
And the first step in that plan?
Win battles.
Win them quickly, and
win them dramatically.
And that’s exactly what Hannibal did.
Now, there have been tens of thousands
of pages written about the genius
of Hannibal’s military strategy, so
if you are a military history buff,
you’ll have to excuse the brevity with
which we’ll be covering them today.
The first sensational victory came at
the River Trebia in 218 BCE, not long
after Hannibal had emerged from the Alps.
A large Roman force was
sent up to meet him.
And just in case you need a reminder,
Roman soldiers were incredibly
well-drilled and well-trained.
But they were ill-prepared
for a master tactician.
At Trebia, the Romans assumed Hannibal
and his army would be weak, cold, and
demoralised after the gruelling crossing.
They were wrong.
Hannibal sent his light cavalry
to the bank of the river to
try to draw the Romans across.
The Romans took the bait and marched
through the freezing river, assuming
their superior forces would have
no problem defeating the seemingly
small number of Hannibal’s cavalry.
Little did the Romans
know that it was a trap.
Hannibal's men, well-rested and hidden
in ambush positions, attacked the
Romans while they were mid-stream.
It was a slaughter.
The Romans were soaked,
shivering, and unorganised.
Hannibal’s cavalry outflanked them,
and a hidden unit he had concealed
in nearby reeds attacked from behind.
The Roman line collapsed.
Thousands were killed or taken prisoner.
It was a textbook example
of Hannibal’s genius.
He didn’t just fight.
He manipulated.
He shaped the battlefield
to his advantage.
He attacked not only the Roman army,
but Roman arrogance, their assumption
that strength alone would be enough.
The following year, 217 BCE, the
Romans sent another army to stop him.
This time, they met at Lake
Trasimene, in central Italy.
Once again, Hannibal
lured them into a trap.
He hid his army in the hills and
waited for the perfect moment.
As the Roman column marched along
a narrow path at the edge of the
lake, his troops launched a surprise
attack from the high ground.
The Romans were trapped: the lake on
one side, the hills on the other, and
enemy soldiers pouring down upon them.
It was another massacre.
Roman sources claim that 15,000 were
killed, and another 10,000 captured.
It remains one of the largest ambushes
in military history, and is quite a
testament to Hannibal’s supreme authority
and control over his men, men who would
have spoken dozens of different languages,
and many who would be itching for the
chance to avenge murdered loved ones and
relatives at the hands of the Romans.
There were something like 40,000 men who
lay hidden in the wood above the hills,
watching carefully as the Roman army
marched far enough past for Hannibal
to give the order to finally attack.
And the result was, well, one of
history’s deadliest ambushes, and
another devastating loss for Rome.
Rome, at this point,
was in a state of panic.
This foreign general had marched across
the Alps, destroyed two Roman armies,
and was now in the heart of Italy.
Whispers began to spread.
Would he march on Rome itself?
But Hannibal didn’t.
Not yet.
And this decision, perhaps more
than any other, has puzzled
historians for centuries.
Why didn’t he go straight for Rome?
There are a few possible reasons.
Firstly, Rome was well fortified.
Its walls were high and thick.
Hannibal didn’t have the siege
equipment to breach them.
Secondly, he may have hoped that
with enough victories, Rome’s
allies would desert it, and the
city would collapse from within.
A siege, he knew, would be long
and costly, and his army had never
been particularly good at sieges.
Ambushes and surprise attacks on
the field - that was his thing.
And so instead, he continued his
campaign through Italy, trying
to weaken Roman alliances, break
their hold on the peninsula,
and draw them into more battles.
Which brings us to 216 BCE.
To the fields of Cannae.
Here, the Romans had had enough.
They raised the largest army
they had ever assembled.
Estimates vary, but some sources suggest
up to 80,000 infantry and 6,000 cavalry.
Two Roman consuls, each commanding
half of the force, led them
out to finally crush Hannibal.
Hannibal had perhaps 50,000 men.
He was outnumbered nearly 2 to 1.
And yet, he won.
Not just won; he annihilated them.
At Cannae, Hannibal demonstrated
perhaps the most perfect example of
battlefield strategy in ancient history.
He deliberately placed his most
lightly-armoured troops, mostly
Gauls, whom the Romans viewed as
fierce but undisciplined warriors,
in the centre of his line.
As the Romans advanced, this centre
slowly gave ground, forming a
crescent, then a sort of half circle.
To the Romans, it looked
like Hannibal was collapsing.
So they pushed harder, deeper,
funnelling themselves into the curve.
Little did they know that that
was exactly what Hannibal wanted.
Once the Romans were surrounded
on three sides, his elite African
infantry attacked from the sides.
His cavalry, having driven off the
Roman horsemen, came in from behind.
The Romans were surrounded
in every direction.
They couldn’t move.
They couldn’t fight; they were too
packed together to lift their weapons.
They couldn’t even run.
What followed was a killing field.
Estimates vary wildly, but it’s
believed that around 50,000 Roman
soldiers were killed in a single day.
It was one of the worst defeats in
Roman history, and by some measures,
more Roman soldiers were being killed
per minute than would be by machine
guns on the battlefield of the Somme.
And still, Hannibal didn’t march on Rome.
Why not?
Again, we can only speculate.
Perhaps he lacked siege equipment.
Perhaps he didn’t believe
the city would fall.
Perhaps he hoped Rome would
finally sue for peace.
But Rome didn’t.
And this is where the tide began to turn.
The Romans changed their strategy.
They adopted what became known as
the Fabian Strategy, named after
the general Quintus Fabius Maximus.
Rather than face Hannibal in open battle,
they avoided direct confrontation.
They harassed his supply lines.
They wore him down.
Now, Fabius Maximus had been advocating
for this strategy since the early
Roman defeats, but it was not a
popular one with the Roman leadership.
Rome was a military power, Romans
gained honour and glory in battle,
and running away from the battlefield
instead of towards it seemed the
antithesis of everything Rome stood for.
Yet, after these three catastrophic
defeats, it was agreed that perhaps
Fabius Maximus might have a point.
Years passed.
Hannibal’s army remained in Italy
but was fighting a war of attrition.
The Romans would launch little attacks
on parties foraging for food, they
would burn fields and crops, and they
would do everything they could to make
surviving difficult for Hannibal’s forces.
As for the Carthaginians, they were
far from home, with no reinforcements,
no steady supply of men or food.
Hannibal’s initial hope, that
Rome’s allies would rise up and join
him, had largely not transpired.
Some did, but most stayed loyal to Rome.
Eventually, Rome took the
fight back to Carthage itself.
A seasoned Roman commander,
Publius Cornelius Scipio, fresh
from victories in Iberia, led a
daring campaign in North Africa.
To counter this threat, and because
not much progress was being made
in the Italian peninsula, Carthage
recalled Hannibal and his forces.
And it was there, at the
Battle of Zama in 202 BCE, that
Hannibal finally met his match.
Scipio had studied Hannibal.
He knew his tactics, he knew the
advantages and disadvantages of his
various types of soldiers, and he
knew how Hannibal liked to fight.
Scipio outmanoeuvred him, used Roman
discipline to resist the initial
elephant charge, and then exploited
gaps in the Carthaginian line.
Hannibal was defeated, and
Carthage was forced to surrender.
Hannibal lived on for
another couple of decades.
He entered politics, tried to reform
Carthage, and later went into exile.
He continued to advise other
kings and even plotted further
campaigns against Rome.
In one display of particularly creative
military thinking, in a battle between
two naval powers in modern-day Turkey,
he advised for poisonous snakes to be
put into clay pots and then thrown onto
the enemy ship, the logic being that
soldiers on ships don’t tend to wear
many clothes, and they can’t exactly
run away, so having hundreds of angry
poisonous snakes slithering around is
pretty much any sailor’s worst nightmare.
Now, despite the fact that he
had been exiled from Carthaginian
society, Rome never forgot him.
They pursued him across the
Mediterranean, determined to stamp
out the threat once and for all.
Eventually, cornered in what is now
modern-day Turkey, and with Roman
forces bearing down on him, Hannibal
took poison rather than be captured.
His last words are said to have been:
“Let us now relieve the Romans from the
fear which has long disturbed them.”
He was 64 years old.
And yet, more than two thousand years
later, the fear he inspired, the
brilliance he displayed, the legacy
he left behind… it still lingers.
Hannibal didn’t destroy Rome.
But he very nearly did.
And in so doing, he showed the world
what a determined, brilliant mind
could achieve with limited resources,
a deep sense of purpose, and an oath
made as a child that he never forgot.
OK, then, that is it for
today's episode on Hannibal.
If you are interested, there are some
really good videos about these battles
on YouTube, with all sorts of people
recreating them in astonishing detail,
so if that sounds like your kind of
thing, just search for Hannibal on
YouTube and you’ll find some good stuff.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.